# EC2 - Elastic Cloud Compute

It is a web service that provides resizable compute capacity in cloud.

## EC2 Options

- ### On Demand
  #### Use Cases
  - Suitable for users without any upfront payment or no long term commitment.
  - Suitable for application with short term and unpredictable loads that cannot be interrupted.
  - Applications under testing or development for the first time on AWS EC2.
- ### Reserved
  #### Use Cases
  - Steady application state and predictable usage.
  - Appliction that require reserved capacity.
  - Upfront payments to reducte costs.
    - **Standard Reserved Instances:** offers upto 75% discount on on-demand prices.
    - **Convertable Reserved Instances:** offers upto 54% discount on on-demand prices. The attributes can changed. Like we can go from memory optimized to compute optimized.
    - **Shceduled Reserved Instances:** On fridays, for a month or for a week.
- ### Spot
  #### Use Cases
  - Applications having flexible start and end times.
  - Apps that are only feasible at low compute costs.
  - Users with urget requirement for large amounts of compute capacity.
  #### Note
  In case of spot instances if the AWS EC2 terminated the instance then the user won't charged for the partial hour usage. If the user him/herself terminated the instance then the we have to pay for the entire hour usage charge.
- ### Dedicated Hosts
  #### Use Cases
  - Regulatory requirements preventing the support or usage of multi tenant virtualization. Ex: Health industry
  - Licensing that don't support multi tenant virtualization. Ex: Oracle VM etc
  - Can be purchased on-demand (Hourly).
  - Can be purchased on reservation and get upto 70% discount on the on-demand prices.

## Types/Families Of EC2 Instances

- **F** - Field programmable gate array - Genomics, Financial analytics, realtime video processing and big data
- **I** - High speed storage - NOSql and data warehousing
- **G** - Graphics Intensive - Video encoding and 3D application streaming
- **H** - High disk throughput - MapRFs, HDFS
- **T** - Low cost and general purpose - T2.nano and T2.medium
- **D** - Dense Storage - File storage, data warehousing and Hadoop
- **R** - Memory optimized - Memory intensive applications and DBs
- **M** - General Purpose - Application servers
- **C** - Compute optimized - CPU intensive applications and DBs
- **P** - Graphics and General purpose GPU - Machine learning and bit coin mining
- **X** - Memory optimized - SAP HANA/Apache Spark
